We're about to begin an interview with Reverend
William B. Rogers of Denton, Texas. It's April 6,
1984, and we'll be discussing the Civil Rights
Movement during the 1950s and early 60s,
especially concerning Prince Edward County,
where Reverend Rogers lived for several years.
To begin, could you give a general background of
your upbringing, where you were born, and just
kind of a general view of leading into how you ended
up in Prince Edward County? Well, this is very
pertinent to the subject because there is a good
bit of background here that leads up to a quite
accidental presence in Prince Edward County at
that particular time. But my background was very
much in the civil rights movements of the old south
long ago because my dad was one of the old school
southern liberals lawyers in Arkansas. And he got
into some real difficulties with the body politic
and other things. He was a young assistant
attorney general of the state at a time when a
preliminary kind of Scottsboro case, if you're
familiar with that, in Alabama, happened in
Arkansas. And he was able to defuse this a good bit
in his investigations and reports and so forth,
and the refusal of the state to prosecute some
blacks who were accused of rape. But as it turned
out, money had changed hands. It was strictly an
act of prostitution on the part of the white woman
with the black men. But this was quite a lesson for
my dad. This was back in the early 20s. He
discovered in this case that he would never be able
to stand for public office in Arkansas, which was
his goal. because he had some real political
ambitions. As it turned out, the Attorney
General, who was the elected officer he was
working with, was defeated the next time on the
basis of his support of my dad. So there's a long
history here, and a lot of the things in the
political realm that my dad worked for. He was an
ardent new dealer, for instance, when the time
came. In fact, he was on Roosevelt's first list of
federal judge appointees. He turned it down at the
time because he said he couldn't feed his family on
what the federal judge was paid in those days. But
he, later on, in Little Rock and in El Dorado, he got
the reputation of what was, he was called a nigger
lawyer. And a nigger lawyer was somebody who would
stand up for the blacks in the courts and often
defend them and some of their difficulties and so
forth. So this, there's a long tradition here in
the South and in the Deep South as far as these
things are concerned and I suppose I became pretty
much an heir to my own heritage in and how this
developed. In my first pastorate in Brooklyn,
Brooklyn, New York, the church integrated for the
first time in subsequent years with a pastor who
moved in to stay following me. It's about a 50-50
black and white church. The block had been busted
while I was there, and we were able to reduce some of
the barriers And, of course, when a block is busted
in the city, this is a traumatic experience for the
old blind whites who lived there and so forth. But
this was in the central part of Brooklyn, and, of
course, the blacks had pretty well taken over, or
were taking over at that time. A real model, I
think. I can't take any of the credit for it,
because it's been the work of a white pastor in that
situation who actively sought the blacks within
the church. But at least I had a role in it starting,
and I take some pride in that. But my next pastorate
was in Prince Edward County. I was chaplain of
Hampton-Sydney College and pastor of the college
church, which was about half the college
community, which was right out in the country. Of
course, this was the seat back in 1776 when the
college was founded. But the town moved seven
miles away to Farmville, which is the county seat
of Prince Edward County. And Hampton-Sydney
College, the church was right in the middle of the
college campus. Of course, it's a Presbyterian
church-related college. And it was quite a
challenge for a lot of ways. Now, Prince Edward
County is about as deep south as you can find, even
in places like Mississippi. It's Southside,
Virginia. It has its traditions, its peculiar
Virginia-type traditions. People like Patrick
Henry and James Madison were natives of the
county. It has quite a tradition. It's right next
to Appomattox where the final surrender took
place. The final battles actually took place in
Prince Edward County where Lee's forces were
retreating toward Appomattox. finally caught up
with at that point. But there was an issue there
from the very beginning. The quality of the
schools, separate but equal so-called schools,
in Prince Edward County were very poor. And the
educational level of the blacks in that county was
pretty low. In fact, some of the Some of the very
dear white people who protested and were in the way
of the integration of the schools simply had never
known blacks who had more than a high school
education. Now, of course, a high school
education in Prince Edward County wasn't worth
very much to the people who were graduating from
Hartford. Of course, this had been a continuing
problem with all black schools all the way
through. So when the NAACP, Thurgood Marshall was
the key person in all of this. He was the one who was
working through the courts as a means for
providing educational opportunity for black
children. And incidentally, I'm a great admirer
of Thurgood Marshall. I got to know him at that
point. greatly admire some of the things he did. I
haven't seen him more than on a couple of
occasions. But he was the legal brain who pushed
this thing through and saw this one legal point as a
point of breakthrough for educational
opportunity. There was another black lawyer
named Hill from Richmond who was also involved in
the NAACP. There's no question, but as the Whites
and Prince Edward pointed out, that this was all
agitated by outside agitators. But the caliber of
those agitators was something else again. It was
the NAACP. They saw in Prince Edward County and
simultaneous with this, the other county, three
other counties, I believe, Delaware and Kansas,
South Carolina. they saw an opportunity for
several cases to come before the Supreme Court at
the same time and have a definitive decision on
this subject to do away with the separate but
equal, which was of course really unequal. So,
there were meetings, some of the More educated
blacks in the county were involved, and there were
a very few of us whites, only two or three who were
involved.
I was in the only real educational center. There
was another college in Farmerville, a woman's
college, but Hampton-Sydney was very much a
traditional Virginia-type institution. almost
a small Ivy League-type school. The students
there were largely rural Virginia, conservative
in background, but yet of the first families in
this kind of land. And all the way through, the
issues that remained, I was never able to rally
much support from the students there. This was
before the days of student activism, and I
despaired of students ever being useful or
involved in anything that might
mean some progress as far as educational
opportunities and others were concerned. But
this ran through the course in the county here. It
wasn't an issue to a lot of people. It was just an
issue to those of us who were interested in it until
it came as one of the suits before the Supreme
Court. One of the incidents I remember
particularly in this, I had taken a stand from the
pulpit and I had written a letter or two to the local
paper just as sort of a general thing of support it
wasn't anything radical or anything that even got
me ostracized in the community at this point but
this was at the time that the oral arguments were
being made before the Supreme Court and there was a
very sweet old gentleman he must have been in his
70s at that time named McElwain He was the attorney
for the school board who was resisting this suit by
the NAACP and of course the local blacks. And he was
reporting to the Lions Club immediately after he
came back from this oral, the oral arguments
before the Supreme Court. And it didn't occur to
anybody in that Lions Club that there might be some
support in the white community for the blacks in
this case. And I tried to be very discreet, and
certainly I respected Mr. McElwain. I didn't want
to challenge him, but I asked some fairly sharp
questions of him. And that was the end of my
relationship to the Lions Club in Prince Edward
County. He was, of course, he had been involved in
this all the way through. He had a brother who was a
Presbyterian missionary in Japan, and I
respected him and I respected the family. But
when the actual decision was made by the Supreme
Court, there was complete shock and dismay in the
county And then, of course, is when my role in this,
as limited and remote as it was, I had no real role at
all except within the white community. And this
was a very negative role because my position was
never accepted. There were two issues in the
church at that time. One was the reunion of the two
branches of the Presbyterian Church, which was
defeated at that General Assembly, which came
immediately after the cause, primarily, of this
integration decision. And then this question of
the integration of the schools. And I took my side,
the liberal side of both. I was commissioner to
that General Assembly. That was in Montreat,
North Carolina? Well, it often is and has been in
Montreat. It was in Atlanta at this particular
time. But at that General Assembly, I got a
petition from about 90% of the elders of that
Presbytery, West Hanover Presbytery, which was
the region west of Richmond over to Lynchburg.
asking me two things. There was a resolution
concerning integration before General Assembly
asking me to oppose integration at the General
Assembly and asking me to oppose the reunion of the
two churches. Well, I couldn't do that in
conscience. are in the pulpit or anywhere else. So
I wrote a letter and mimeographed it and sent it to
all of those elders who had signed this petition
from all of the churches, including out of 12 out of
13 of my elders in the section. And that's when it
really hit the fan. Because What I was saying was
that the gospel couldn't be preached by popular
vote, and that I had to vote my conscience on this,
as I believe my conscience was enlightened by
Scripture. Well, from that point, it was just a
question of how long I could remain
in the community. It was a traumatic experience,
because I loved those people. good, solid people,
but they were just living in a different age. And it
was just incomprehensible that black children
could go to school with the white children in the
little worship school, which was nearby, and all
the children and the professors went there. And it
was just beyond, they couldn't accept it. One of
the real stories here, and it was a personal story,
and one of friendship, and I believe mutual
respect. There was an old doctor in the
congregation. He was pushing 80, but everybody
there was old. This was one of the problems. The
average age of my session was 70. But this old
doctor, Dr. Moore, he was the old family doctor for
all of the people in the area. But most of his
practice was with blacks. And he was a devoted
person in terms of his Christian vocation and his
desire to help people and so forth. But he lived in
another age. He was a staunch segregationist. And
he was the one, this was such a traumatic thing for
the people in the church, they couldn't even talk
to me about it. But old Dr. Moore was one who would
talk to me. And after a church service in which I may
have made some reference, or in some cases devoted
services to issues of this kind, everybody else
would, I wouldn't even speak to him, but he would
argue with me, and many a time there had been Sunday
dinners waiting two or three hours as we would have
it out. But, you see, the difficulty was with the
position that I took, I couldn't really challenge
on moral grounds the argument of a man like Dr.
Moore because he provided the only medical
services available to most of the blacks in the
south half of Prince Edward County. Many a time
I've seen that man, as old and firm as he was, come in
at dawn because he had to go right by our house as he
went out to this rural area and he was serving the
blacks either death or birth or an acute illness
and he was the kind of doctor who would be there and
see it through but with all of his service and all of
his idea of using his services, Christian
vocation. He was a segregationist. This is the
incongruity in the situation. Of course, he was,
this was paternalism in the traditional Southern
fashion. To be nice to them, do everything you can
to help them and so forth, even help their school
situation. But still, everything was still in the
control of the whites, and it was sort of a paternal
looking out after their interests, and so forth.
And this was the whole community, but it was
particularly Dr. Moore, and as I say, I admired and
respected him. I think there was a lot of mutual
admiration and respect in that community, but the
point came when it was no longer possible to carry
on an effective ministry there. And what little
support, I did have some support from the
students, but it was not an outspoken support. It
was sort of a private thing.
We're with you, Mr. Bill, or we're... We agree with
you, but we can't go home and say this. And most of
them were from rural or small towns in Virginia.
But at any rate, it hit close home a lot of other
ways, too. I have a pretty thick eye. I mean, I can
endure this kind of situation up to a point, though
it hurt. But Agnes doesn't. And she had a very
strong
reaction to some of this. And for her mental health
and other reasons, we had to leave. First it was to
go on, and then I was wrapping up my doctoral work at
that time. So we resigned. I simply went to
Richmond, and we were there for, oh, for three more
months. that summer and then I was given a look out
for something else. That's how we became Texans,
because it was not possible after that experience
to go back to the Deep South. But at any rate, this
was more a personal thing. Now, as far as the the
actual litigation is concerned, I had no part in
that whatsoever. I simply met on very few
occasions with some of the people who had the same
kind of concerns that I did. and was able at least to
demonstrate that there was some white support for
the things that they were trying to achieve.
Thurgood Marshall came down, and is that where you
met him? Yes, yes, this is where I met him. He was in
New York also. Yes, well, yes, that was his base,
but he visited, I think, All four or five, some of
them didn't really get to this, but there were a
number of challenges, legal challenges, that
were made in the courts, both in the North and in the
South, so that this could come before the Supreme
Court as a fundamental legal issue that could be
decided once and for all. And he was the real
architect of this whole structure. I mean, his
whole point was this one unconstitutional point,
the separate but equal, which obviously, as it was
practiced and carried out both in the North and the
South, was both unequal. Well, it was separate,
but it was unequal. There was no possible equality
on the basis of a separate school system, I
suppose. There was real consternation in Prince
Edward County, and I have an idea that what you've
seen in the New York Times dealt primarily with the
abolition of the public schools in Prince Edward
County, which came after that. Actually, it came,
this was in the words, in fact, this is what they had
been saying, threatening all along, that if
this... and of course it went through the
appellate courts and up to the Supreme Court and
was won all the way. But if this was sustained by the
Supreme Court, Prince Edward County had no choice
but to abolish public schools. And of course what
that meant was, and it was very obvious to everyone
who was involved here, there would be no schooling
for the blacks. The whites would organize their
own private schools. And the only way to get any
kind of education at all for children was to enroll
in these private schools. So there was a great deal
of scurrying about and organizing the private
school system. And then the year that I left, the
county abolished the public school system. And
what that meant was that even The limited schools
that they had were not available anymore. And for
about five or six years, there was no public school
in Prince Edward County at all. Now, eventually,
they were forced by court order to reopen the
public schools. But it was too late for a lot
of the kids who grew up without any schooling
whatsoever. And then when the school resumed, it
was, well, there was consternation.
It was chaos in the public schools that were
reordering it. And not really until now has it
settled down. Now, there's still a private school
system, but I think most whites, particularly in
academic communities like Hampton-Sydney and
Longwood, out of principle, they send their
children to public school, but with some
supplementary schooling and so forth. And maybe
they use the private schools in part There are a lot
of difficult issues and questions here. Of
course, the fact that a large majority of people in
Prince Edward County, particularly school age,
are black is a factor here. But I've often thought
in subsequent years how that might have been
handled in a better way. Of course, there had to be
confrontation. in order for, had to be legal
confrontation, in order for things to be done that
were actually accomplished. But in terms of the
church and its role, I don't know. I think I would
have done things differently. I think I would have
been, I would have taken my stand. I had to do that.
But I think I would have been less abrasive about
it, or at least abrasive in terms of the old
paternal society
in Prince Edward County. I was an outsider, you
see. One of the funny things, I had a friend who was
presiding at the congregational meeting when I
was called, And he swears up and down that the first
15 minutes of reporting on me, they were reporting
on my wife's family. Agnes' father was a graduate
of Agnes. and the family was very much a part of that
Virginia tradition and so forth. But I was this
Arkansan interloper who was acceptable on the
basis of my wife's family. But no, there were real
personal times and it was really an anguishing
experience for all of us because we were close. And
I think there
was a great deal of acceptance of what I was trying
to get across as a pastor there. Yet, there can be
only partial acceptance. And it was a source of
great distress to
a lot of people. And I felt
that I had to go and stay and find a job. I think I
would have, except for the kind of pressures that
we had with children. That kind of pressure she
put on me was too much in that kind of situation.
She's the one who got the personal brunt of it, you
see. I can sort of live up on this plane and take my
stand. I can do no other, this kind of thing. But on a
personal level,
it was very difficult. Well, we came on. to the
campus ministry here at North Texas and at TWU and
taught in both institutions. And the same issue
followed me right here because the first thing
that happened here at North Texas was court
integration of North Texas State University, the
first institution in Texas, or at least public
institution, that decreed integration. Well, we
were prepared for it. And in those days, this was
days of the large, many students were involved in
student movements. Quite a different situation
in Sydney because students became involved right
at the beginning. Our Presbyterian group, which
was really as much an ecumenical group as anything
else, integrated rather massively from the
start. And the kids would picket the campus
theater. We would continue to be, at least for a
while. You see, the community was still
segregated in Denton, but the North Texas was
integrated. Really, it was a very wise policy of
Dr. Matthews, the president at that time. He was
trying to keep the publicity down to a minimum. and
yet to make everything internally, make the
things work. And so, there were a lot of
interesting situations there. For instance, one
thing our group did was to integrate Austin
College up here. We had, our kids were going up
there, it was some kind of weekend college rally.
And we had four black kids who signed up to go. So I
called up Ashby Johnson, who was a chaplain of
Austin College at that time, a good friend, and
said, we're going to integrate your college.
And he was completely sympathetic with us. I mean,
he said the time had come, and he was just hoping for
an occasion where things simply could go on and
happen. It was done, and no fuss and fanfare about
it. And as it turned out, there were some other
things happening back here. Only one black girl
went with our group. We had about eight or ten
there. It went smoothly, no problems, and As far as
Austin College was concerned, it had already
happened, you see, because there were
progressive people in charge of things then. But
it was rather interesting that it was our group
that posed the issue. And, of course, my warning
Ashby Johnson in advance of what was happening
helped him to prepare for it and to make sure that
there were no incidents and this kind of thing. But
the black gal who went up there had a wonderful
time, and it was a happy occasion for all, and so we
were real pleased with that. But North Texas
really pioneered this situation in Texas as far as
the public schools were concerned. I give Dr.
Matthews, who was president at that time, great
credit for the way he handled it. You see, when the
blacks came in to North Texas,
it was on a massive basis. I think about 400. Many of
the graduate students came in at the same time. One
of the funny things that happened along with his
first integrated class, who were a number of
football players, some basketball players. And
in this first group was little Abner Haynes, who
was a terrific hatback, slickest running hatback
I think I'd ever seen up to that point. And as soon as
he was in his first game as a freshman, integration
was suddenly enthusiastic. I think that really
made it a lot easier, because Little Abner, and
there were a couple of others, and then about three
or four years later, Mean Joe Green came in. And so
that took care of it. But you know, I was real
interested. It was also the time of Oscar
Robertson in Cincinnati. And Cincinnati and
North Texas were in the same conference at that
time. And in the old gym,
we went
to a game, and Oscar Robertson and two or three
other blacks were on the Cincinnati team. And I
think North Texas at that time had one or two black
players, but they were not prominent players.
They were just on the team, I think, when I got in the
game. But when Oscar Robertson came to town, of
course he was the drawing card for Blacks and Pikes
Alive, I noticed that every black student at North
Texas was at that game. And I was wondering there
whether they had come to cheer for Oscar Robertson
because he was a celebrity, he was the great
player. And the thing that that impressed me or
convinced me that integration was really a
success at North Texas is when those black
students were cheering for North Texas. I mean,
they came to see Oscar Robertson. They had great
admiration and respect for that kind of a
building, but they were cheering their own team.
They were a part of the North Texas situation, even
though very limited participation by black
students and by black basketball players. At that
time, of course, things have completely changed
since then. It's mostly black now, everywhere, as
far as basketball is concerned. But those have
been some of the experiences, and North Texas was
very much in the fan of integration. When it first
happened, I was reading in Time Magazine
something about how there was no, there were no
black students in white colleges in the
Dallas-Fort Worth area, and no public ones in all
of Texas. And there were 400-odd in North Texas at
that time. But this is how much Dr. Matthews had
been able to keep it quiet until it was a success,
and then it was published. But that was just sort of
a funny sidelight that, of course, Time and New
York Times and others were reporting on these
things for several years after the Brown Supreme
Court decision in 1954. But it's come a long way.
Well, this, my whole career, if you could call it
that, has been dominated by this issue. Not by
choice, necessarily. I just happen to be in the
places where it happened. And having certain
convictions and being all a little bit
confrontational about and so forth,
I guess I've been involved more directly than some
other ministers. Most of them shared the
convictions that I've had, they just haven't been
quite as outspoken or vocal about it, or haven't
been placed in the situations where they had to
make decisions of this kind. So when I was on the
staff of the National Council of Churches, The
question was raised, and this was the higher
education staff. At that time, I was director of
Faculty of Christian Fellowship, which was the
Christian faculty group in the country,
ecumenical groups, all the denominations. And we
were beginning to raise some questions. There
were a good many people who were concerned about
this, with the progression of immigration, and
the opportunities for black students broadening
into the predominantly white higher educational
institutions. The black institutions, all black
institutions, traditional, primarily
church-related institutions and state ones,
were more and more getting into the backwaters.
They were being bypassed. Most of them seemed to be
with the most progressive blacks, so those with
the best training in the public schools and so
forth going on to integrated institutions. It was
more a matter of remedial training in some of these
backwater black institutions. So there were a
number of conferences
involving all the boards and agencies of the
predominantly white denominations that had
sponsored these schools and also the black
denominations that had had these at the very core
of their being for many years because these black
colleges were tremendously important to the
blacks. In fact, I would say the only two
indigenous black institutions for the church and
the black college. And as a result of these
consultations, and this came out of the National
Council of the Churches primarily, the decision
was made that these indigenous institutions in
the black community needed to be supported and
brought up to date and brought into the the
academic view, and so forth, to a much more extent,
which meant going to foundations, increasing
church support, trying to sponsor government
programs to particularly to support this type of
institution to go out on all fronts and to try to
strengthen these colleges, to integrate them, as
was indicated by still to maintain basically
their control and the black control over these
institutions. Of course, in many cases, it was
white nations in control. But at any rate, to
emphasize the fact that this is an indigenous
black institution and that it has merit on its own.
It may not be able to attract the best black
students in the future, but there's still a role
for him. I think one thing that, I won't forget the
name, he was president of Fisk College in
Nashville, which was a very fine black
institution. But he was saying that what the, he
was talking about Ivy League institutions and
other They said, what these institutions are
looking for primarily is the top 5% in 100 million
pound handbags. And that was exactly true. You
see, the Ivy League was trying to skim off the cream
of the crop. Well, what do you do with all the rest of
them? I mean, they have to have educational
opportunities, even if there has to be a lot of
remedial work to bring them to the level of the
college degree. So I was assigned at that time by
these consultations and this group. It became a
regular structure in the National Council of
Churches to try to develop a program on all of these
fronts that we were working on at that time to
strengthen these colleges The first thing I did
was to visit everyone and talk to their presidents
and their boards whenever possible, professors,
and to make friendships and to see what might be
done here. And of course, it was a tremendously
enlightening experience to me. I had always
thought of myself as being very sympathetic to the
blacks concerns and being a southerner myself I
understood some of the mores hopefully from the
black perspective as well as the white and so forth
but I learned lots of new things one of the things at
the beginning I would get this I would be trying to
get some to understand something about how things
were done or what the power structure is in this
particular school. And some of these guys were
telling me, say, Bill, You don't understand the
mores. You can't think like a black or something
like that. Now, the particular issue in this case,
I was trying to find out who really ran Paul Quinn
College in Waco, Texas. Now, it was traditionally
the bishop who lived right next to the campus. But
in this case, the bishop was 85 years old and was . I
mean, he was just the figurehead. Well, I knew the
president of the college. He wasn't even a
minister, and you almost had to be a minister to be
in a power situation. I knew he wasn't the... And so
I was trying to find just who was running that
college. I never did find out. I think it was the
bishop's secretary. It was... Well, they didn't
call him a secretary. He was a minister, and he was
the bishop's administrator or something like
that. But I never did get to him. That was the thing.
I couldn't really talk to him about these programs
and so on. But at any rate, they would say, Bill, you
don't understand the nuances of this situation.
And the nuance was, who was boss? I mean, who was
really boss? So I got into lots of situations like
that, and I was accepted. But I was working with
them and trying to do things. Well, what we finally
did, and this was with the help of the Ford
Foundation primarily, I found an administrator,
a staff person at the Ford Foundation who was
really interested in going ahead with this thing.
So he made a grant to our National Council office,
really it was just a grant to take care of the
structure and the meetings and my salary and
things like this for a couple of years while we
tried to develop something. And then, one of the,
of course we were working, all of the people in
political power in the black community at that
time. Now this was beginning Lyndon Johnson's
administration.
Civil rights measures were being passed and this
whole business of special grants for black
institutions.
It was no, it was equality, presumably, but it was,
no, it wasn't equality, it was the affirmative
action and over and above grants for those because
of the minority background and so forth. It's
pretty well gone by the boards now, but there was a
lot of idealism in those days, and special
programs were set up specifically between black
colleges
from health education, welfare, and GW. I spent a
good bit of time in Washington trying to work
through some of these things with black
presidents. Benny Mays, who was the head of
Morehouse College, I think he was already
retired, but he was, I guess, the most respected
black
figure in education at that time. He was helpful,
and this president of Fisk, and oh, a number of
others. There were some great men involved. in
that area, but I was a sort of an operator working in
and out using the influence of black educators and
making proposals and so forth. And one of the
things we did was to try to set up the consortium
idea among the black colleges, that is to allow
regional areas of the black colleges.
Because a lot of these programs, academic
programs we were proposing, no one college was big
enough or strong enough really to do it, even with
the influx of a lot of money. They were too small and
too weak to do that. But we figured that on the basis
of a consortium, we could go pretty far. in, say,
putting one good business program in a consortium
of several colleges.